Causes - Phobias
    
  














A phobia can develop during childhood, adolescence or early adulthood.
They can be linked to a frightening event or stressful situation. However, it's not always clear why some phobias occur.






Specific or simple phobias
Specific or simple phobias, such as a fear of heights (acrophobia), usually develop during childhood.
Simple phobias can be linked to an early negative childhood experience. For example, if you're trapped in a confined space when you're young, you may develop a fear of enclosed spaces (claustrophobia) when you're older.
It's also thought that phobias can sometimes be "learnt" from an early age. For example, if someone in your family has a fear of spiders (arachnophobia), you may also develop the same fear yourself.
Other factors in the family environment, such as having parents who are particularly anxious, may also affect the way you deal with anxiety later in life.






Complex phobias
It's not known what causes complex phobias, such as 
agoraphobia
 and 
social phobia
. However, it's thought that 
genetics
, brain chemistry and life experiences may all play a part in these type of phobias.
The physical reactions (symptoms) a person experiences when faced with the object of their fear are real and aren't simply "in their head".
The body reacts to the threat by releasing the hormone adrenaline, which causes symptoms such as:
sweating
trembling
shortness of breath
a rapid heartbeat (tachycardia)

















            More in
            
              
Phobias











                        Overview - Phobias
                      







                        Symptoms - Phobias
                      





                      Causes - Phobias
                    





                        Treatment - Phobias
                      







                        Self-help - Phobias
                      

















        Page last reviewed: 27 July 2022
        

        Next review due: 27 July 2025