Treatment - Phobias
    
  














Many people with a phobia don't need treatment and avoiding the object of their fear is enough to control the problem.
However, it may not always be possible to avoid certain phobias, such as a fear of flying. In this instance, you may decide to get professional help and advice to find out about treatment options.
Most phobias are treatable, but no single treatment is guaranteed to work for all phobias. In some cases, a combination of different treatments may be recommended.
The main treatment types are:
self-help techniques
talking treatments
medication
You can refer yourself directly to an NHS talking therapies service without a referral from a GP.














Find an NHS talking therapies service










Talking treatments


Talking treatments, such as 
counselling
, are often very effective at treating phobias. In particular, 
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
 has been found to be very effective for treating phobias.
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
CBT is a type of counselling that can help you manage your problems by changing the way you think and behave. It can be used to develop practical ways of dealing with your phobia.
One part of the CBT treatment process that's often used to treat simple phobias involves gradual exposure to your fear, so you feel less anxious about it. This is known as desensitisation or exposure therapy.
For example, if you have a fear of snakes (ophidiophobia), your therapist may start by asking you to read about snakes. They may later show you a picture of a snake. They may then arrange for you to visit the reptile house of your local zoo to look at some real snakes. The final step would be for you to hold a snake.
Exposure therapy works by gradually increasing the level of exposure to your fear, which allows you to gain control over your phobia. As the treatment progresses, you should begin to feel less anxious about your phobia.
The 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
 doesn't recommend the use of computerised CBT to treat specific phobias in adults.






Video: Talking therapies for stress, anxiety and depression


Animated video explaining self-referral to talking therapies services for stress, anxiety or depression.















    
    Media last reviewed: 14 March 2022

    Media review due: 14 March 2025
  








Medication


Medication isn't usually recommended for treating phobias, because talking therapies are usually effective and don't have any side effects. However, medication may sometimes be prescribed to treat the effects of phobias, such as 
anxiety
.
There are different types of medication that may be prescribed.
Antidepressants
Antidepressants are often prescribed to help reduce anxiety. 
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
 are most often prescribed to treat anxiety, 
social phobia
 or 
panic disorder
. These can include:
escitalopram
 (Cipralex)
sertraline
 (Lustral)
paroxetine
 (Seroxat)
Venlafaxine (Efexor), a serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) may also be prescribed for anxiety.
Common side effects of these treatments include:
nausea
headaches
sleep problems (insomnia)
upset stomach
They may also, initially, make your anxiety worse and can cause sexual problems.
Clomipramine (Anafranil) is a type of tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) that's licensed to treat some phobias. Side effects include:
dry mouth
drowsiness
blurred vision
tremors (shaking)
heart palpitations
constipation
difficulty urinating
Moclobemide (Manerix) is a type of antidepressant from the monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) group of antidepressants. It's sometimes prescribed to treat social phobia.
Moclobemide interacts with certain types of food, so if you're prescribed this medication, read the information leaflet that comes with it to find out which foods to avoid.
Other possible side effects of moclobemide include:
sleep problems
dizziness
stomach problems
headaches
restlessness
If you're prescribed antidepressants, it's very important that you don't suddenly stop taking them. Suddenly stopping can cause withdrawal symptoms. See your GP, who can gradually lower your dose.
Tranquillisers 
Benzodiazepines are a group of medicines that are categorised as minor tranquillisers. They include medicines such as diazepam (Valium) and are sometimes used on a short-term basis at the lowest possible dose to treat severe anxiety. 
Like antidepressants, benzodiazepines should be stopped gradually to avoid withdrawal symptoms.
Beta blockers
Beta blockers
 are often used to treat cardiovascular conditions, such as heart problems and 
high blood pressure (hypertension)
. They are also sometimes prescribed to help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, such as 
heart palpitations
.
Beta blockers slow down your heart rate and decrease your blood pressure. Propranolol (Inderal) is a beta blocker that's commonly used to treat anxiety.
Possible side effects include:
stomach problems
cold fingers
tiredness
sleep problems

















            More in
            
              
Phobias











                        Overview - Phobias
                      







                        Symptoms - Phobias
                      







                        Causes - Phobias
                      





                      Treatment - Phobias
                    





                        Self-help - Phobias
                      

















        Page last reviewed: 27 July 2022
        

        Next review due: 27 July 2025